The Life and Liberation of Padmākara, the Second Buddha

from A Precious Garland of Lapis Lazuli[1]

by Jamgön Kongtrul Lodrö Thaye

Namo Guru-buddhādi-padmākara-pādāya

Padmasambhava, known as the ‘Second Buddha’, has influenced countless beings through the essential
vajrayāna teachings of secret mantra, and especially through his profound terma-treasure
activities here in Tibet. This great master was not an ordinary person on the path,
nor merely a noble being on one of the bodhisattva levels. Guru Padmasambhava was an emanation
of both Buddha Amitābha and the peerless Śākyamuni, and his purpose was to pacify human
and spirit beings that were otherwise difficult to tame. Even the great bodhisattvas are
incapable of fully telling the story of his life and liberation, yet I shall nonetheless
give a brief outline in the pages that follow.

In the dharmakāya realm of ‘Luminous Vajra Essence’, he has been naturally enlightened within
primordial purity — the ground of liberation — since the very beginning. There, he is renowned
as the original lord, Unchanging Light[2].

In the self-manifest saṃbhogakāya realm known as ‘Resounding Drum of Perfection’, he appears
as the boundless array of the five wisdom families of Buddha ‘Immense Ocean,’[3] possessing
the five certainties. As the external manifestation of this natural energy, he is perceived
by all the bodhisattvas on the ten bhūmis in myriad bodily forms within the buddhafields
of the five families, including the semi-manifest, natural nirmāṇakāya realms of Mahābrahma.
All of these are the cloudbanks of the Guru’s wisdom display, his ‘inexhaustible wheel
of adornment,’ and so he is known as ‘Lotus Who Holds All’.

Out of this, in order to tame beings in the countless worlds of the ten directions, there appears
the magical display of his nirmāṇakāya emanations. It is taught that only in this universe,
known as ‘Endurance’, does he illuminate the fifty worlds with the teachings of sūtra
and tantra, taming beings through his eight supreme manifestations.

In one particular account, it is said that Khandro Yeshé Tsogyal had a vision of the Guru as
‘Immense Vajra Ocean,’[4] manifesting in the east. Each of the pores in his body held a billion
realms and in each realm there were a billion world systems. In each of these world
systems there were a billion Gurus, each with a billion emanations. Each of these emanations
was displaying the activity of taming a billion disciples. She then saw a similar display
in all the other cardinal and central directions.

In this world of ours, Jambudvīpa, the Guru is generally known as just one nirmāṇakāya who tames
beings, but according to the different capacities and giftedness of people he is perceived
in multiple ways. Most Indian sources, along with the Oral Transmission of Kīla,[5]
explain that he was born as the son of a king or minister in Uḍḍiyāna, whereas the terma-treasures
for the most part state that he was born miraculously. In some texts, he is said
to have appeared from a bolt of lightning at the summit of Mount Malaya.[6] There is huge
variety in these wondrous accounts of his life and liberation. It is said:

Ten thousand, nine hundred stories of his lifeWere composed and hidden for future disciples...[7]

As these numbers suggest, this is indeed a topic that lies far beyond the reach of the ordinary
intellect. I shall nevertheless present, as a mere nugget, the life of the Guru according
to his miraculous birth, as it appears in the terma teachings:

In the oceans that surround the western land of Uḍḍiyāna to the north, south, and east, there
lies an island close to the land of the rākṣasas, found to Uḍḍiyāna’s southwest. There,
the blessings of all the buddhas took shape in the form of a multi-coloured lotus flower.
Moved by compassion at the suffering of sentient beings, Buddha Amitābha, Lord of Sukhāvatī,
sent from his heart a golden vajra marked with the syllable hrīḥ, which entered into the
bud of the lotus flower. It then miraculously transformed into an eight-year-old child,
endowed with all the major and minor marks of perfection, and holding a vajra and a lotus.
There the young child remained, instructing the island’s devas and ḍākinīs in the profound
Dharma.

Now, it happened that the King of Uḍḍiyāna, Indrabhūti, was without an heir to the throne. Through
his great acts of making offerings to the Three Jewels and giving alms to the poor
and needy, the king had exhausted his treasury, and had set out on a voyage upon the great
lake to find a wish-fulfilling jewel. Upon returning with the jewel, first his minister Triguṇadhara
and then the king himself encountered the amazing child. Regarding him as the
answer to his prayers, the king took him home to the royal palace, where he was given the
name Padmākara, ‘Lotus-Born’, as well as Tsokyé Dorjé, ‘Lake-Born Vajra’. They seated Padmākara
on a throne of precious jewels, and all the while the citizens were delighted by the
rain of foods, clothing, and precious objects that sprang forth from the magic of the wish-fulfilling
jewel.

As the young prince grew up, he brought countless beings to maturation through his youthful
sport and games. He married the ḍākinī Prabhāvatī and ruled the kingdom of Uḍḍiyāna according
to the Dharma. He was known then as King Tortokchen, ‘The Turbaned King’. Seeing that
as a ruler he would be unable to truly serve others and bring about spiritual benefit on a
vast scale, he begged his father for permission to abdicate, but was refused. So, in the
midst of a dance, he pretended that his trident slipped out of his hand, thus managing to
kill the son of a demonic minister and liberate him into the expanse. As a consequence of
breaking the law against killing children, Padmasambhava was promptly banished to the charnel
grounds. Thus he made his way to Śītavana, ‘Cool Grove’, Nandanavana, ‘Joyful Grove’ and
Sosadvīpa, ‘Sosa Land’ where he practiced yogic disciplines. He received empowerments and
blessings from the ḍākinīs Mārajītā, ‘Tamer of Māra’, and Śāntarakṣitā ‘Preserver of Peace’,
and he brought the ḍākinīs of the charnel grounds under his sovereign command. He was
known by the name Śāntarakṣita, ‘Preserver of Peace’.

Returning to the island in Lake Dhanakośa, Padmasambhava likewise brought the ḍākinīs there
under his command—through secret mantra practices in the symbolic language of the ḍākinīs.
Then, as he was practising in Pārusakāvana, ‘Rugged Forest’, Vajravārāhī appeared to him
and blessed him. He subdued the nāgas of the oceans and the planetary spirits of the heavens.
Wisdom ḍākas and ḍākinīs granted him supernatural powers. He was known then as Dorjé Drakpo
Tsal, ‘Wrathful Vajra Might’.

At the ‘Vajra Throne’ in Bodh Gaya, he displayed all kinds of miracles. People asked, “Who are
you?” but when he acknowledged that he was a self-manifested buddha, they could not accept
this and instead insulted and defamed him. Seeing the many good reasons for having a teacher,
Padmasambhava then made his way to Zahor, where he took ordination from Prabhahasti
and was given the name Shakya Sengé, ‘Lion of the Śākyas’. He received the teachings on
yoga-tantra from him, eighteen times, and had visions of the deities.

Then he requested empowerment from the nun Ānandā, who was actually the wisdom ḍākinī Guhyajñāna
manifest in the form of a nun.[8] She transformed him into the seed syllable hūṃ, swallowed
him, and passed him right through her body and out through her secret lotus, granting
him outer, inner and secret empowerments, and purifying the three obscurations.

From the eight vidyādharas, he received the teachings on the Kagyé, the 'Eight Pronouncements’.
From Buddhaguhya he received the teachings on Māyājāla, the 'Magical Net’, and from Śrī
Siṃha he received the teachings of Atiyoga. In this way he studied and received all the
sūtras, tantras and sciences from numerous learned and accomplished masters in India. Padmasambhava
would master a teaching the first time he encountered it, and he experienced visions
of deities without needing to practise. Displaying his attainment of the first vidyādhara
level, the stage of ‘the vidyādhara level of maturation’, the Guru was known as Loden
Choksé, ‘Wise Seeker of the Sublime’.

Returning to Zahor, Padmasambhava charmed the daughter of King Vihārdhara, the authentic ḍākinī
Princess Mandāravā, and took her as his consort. Together they went to the Māratika cave,
where for three months they practised the sādhana of longevity. The Buddha of Limitless
Life, Amitāyus, appeared to them, empowered them with longevity, and blessed them as inseparable
from him. They were given one billion tantras on longevity and they both accomplished
the second vidyādhara level – ‘vidyādhara with mastery over life’.

Now that they had attained vajra bodies beyond birth and death, the Guru and Mandāravā went
back to tame the kingdom of Zahor. One day, as they were out begging for alms, they were arrested
by royal ministers and burned alive, but the Guru transformed the pyre into a lake,
and he and Mandāravā were found sitting upon a lotus blossom in its centre. All around were
inspired by faith, and thus it was that the Guru and his consort caused the kingdom to
embrace the Dharma, establishing its people in the state that is beyond falling back into
saṃsāra.

The Guru then returned with Mandāravā to Uḍḍiyāna, to tame that land as well, but once again
he was recognized while begging for alms, and once again they were burned on a sandalwood
pyre — by the same demonic minister and his henchmen. After some time, the pair were found
seated upon a lotus in the middle of a lake, wearing garlands of skulls, as a symbol of
their activity of liberating all beings from saṃsāra. Padmasambhava was now known as Pema
Tötreng Tsal, ‘Mighty Lotus with Skull-Garland’. For thirteen years, Padmasambhava and Mandāravā
remained in Uḍḍiyāna as teachers by royal appointment, establishing the whole kingdom
in the Dharma. During this time, the Guru gave the empowerment and teachings for the Kadü
Chökyi Gyatso, the 'Ocean of Dharma, the Great Gathering of Transmitted Precepts',[9] through
which the king and queen as well as all the destined ones accomplished the supreme
vidyādhara level. He was then known as Pema Gyalpo, ‘Lotus King’.

In accordance with a prophecy in the Sūtra on Magical Perception,[10] Padmākara transformed
himself into the monk Indrasena in order to bring King Aśoka to the Dharma. He established
Aśoka in unwavering faith, after which, in a single miraculous night, the king erected one
million stūpas all around the world, all containing the relics of the Buddha.[11]

The Guru went on to defeat some powerful heretic kings who were damaging the Buddhist doctrine,
making use of a variety of skilful means, including ejecting their consciousnesses. The
Guru was then poisoned by one recalcitrant king. He remained unharmed, though, and when
they threw him into the Ganges, he reversed the river’s flow and danced in mid-air, earning
the name Khye’u Chung Khading Tsal, ‘Mighty Child of the Garuḍas’.

He manifested in many guises and went by many names, such as the Ācārya Saroruha, founder of
the Hevajra tantra; the Brahmin Saraha; the great Ḍombi Heruka; Virūpa; and Kṛṣṇācārya. In
great charnel grounds like Kuladzokpa, ‘Perfected in Body’, he taught the secret mantra
to ḍākinīs, and he bound outer and inner spirits as protectors of the Dharma. He was then
known as Nyima Özer, ‘Rays of the Sun’.

At Bodh Gaya’s Vajra Throne, five hundred heretical teachers had launched an attack on the Buddhist
teachings. Padmasambhava met them in a competition of debate and power, and emerged
victorious. Some of the teachers then resorted to casting evil spells, whereupon the ḍākinī
Mārajītā, ‘Tamer of Māra’, granted the Guru a wrathful mantra with which he caused lightning
to strike and thereby liberate the evil schemers. Those who survived were converted
to Buddhism, and finally the banner of the Dharma was raised to the skies. Padmasambhava
then became known as Sengé Dradrok, ‘Lion’s Roar’. Up to this point, he had exhausted the
three defilements and been at the ‘vidyādhara level of life-mastery’, the stage of having
fully perfected the supreme path.

Proceeding next to Yangleshö, situated between India and Nepal, the Guru met Śākyadevī, daughter
of the Newar king Puṇyadhara, and accepted her as his sādhana support and consort. Together
they practised glorious Śrī Heruka, but were hindered by spirits, rākṣasas and magical
creatures' intent on creating obstacles — causing a three year drought and, with it, famine
and disease. So Padmasambhava sent two messengers to India to ask his gurus for a teaching
that would counter them. They returned, laden with the tantras and commentaries of
Vajrakīla. The moment they arrived, the obstacles were pacified. It rained, and the drought,
disease and famine came to an end. The Guru and Śākyadevī both attained the great accomplishment
of the third vidyādhara level, ‘vidyādhara of the great seal, or mahāmudrā’.

The Guru famously recognized that Śrī Heruka is like a merchant engaging in trade; the achievement
can be great, but so can the obstacles. Vajrakīla is like the armed escort that is
needed to guard the merchant against obstacles and overcome them. The Guru composed many sādhanas
of Śrī Heruka and Vajrakīla combined. He also bound under oath all the male and female
worldly spirits, such as the sixteen Vajrakīla guardians, and installed them as protectors
of the teachings.

Padmākara visited the border regions of Uḍḍiyāna, such as Hurmuju, Sikodhara, Dharmakośa, and
Rukma. He also went to Tirāhuti[12] and other regions of the Tharu kingdom[13] as well as
other lands such as Kāmarūpa. He taught Dharma according to ability and capacity, benefiting
many beings through his display of common siddhis, bringing water where there was none,
and even draining great lakes and rivers when necessary. In the south, east, and central
parts of India, there were naturally arisen images of a non-Buddhist deities which were
causing indescribable harm to the Buddhist teachings. So, the Guru put an end to this through
the power of Vajrakīla.

Another story tells how the King of the Turks had sent invading armies to the kingdom of Kaccha,
where Buddhist groups were thriving. As the king's boats entered the Nīli river, the
Guru performed the threatening mudrā, sinking five hundred vessels. Thus ended the Turks'
violence.

It is not certain when he went to the land of the Drāviḍa[14], but the Guru gradually tamed
the humans and spirits there, including the ḍākinīs, and he built great monasteries as well.
Even to the present day, this master’s tradition of instructions for the study, explanation,
and meditation of the four classes of tantras — particularly the teachings on Hevajra,
the Secret Moon Drop, Śrī Heruka, Hayagrīva, Kīla and Mātṛkā — has remained widespread.
Drāviḍian accounts relate that he left from that country for the land of the rākṣasas in
the southwest. These are found in Indian sources and are well-known.[15]

Padmasambhava is generally thought to have lived in India for 3,600 years benefiting the teachings
and sentient beings. But it seems that learned people consider that number to represent
half-years, and accept it simply as an indication of many years.

In order to convert people in Mongolia and China, the Guru emanated in the form of a clairvoyant
king and a powerful yogin. Moreover, he appeared in the country of Shangshung as the
miraculously-born child Tavi Hricha, who gave the instructions on the hearing lineage of Atiyoga
and led many worthy disciples to the attainment of the rainbow body. In this way, Padmasambhava’s
activity in leading people to the path of liberation, through appearing in
various places and in various forms, and speaking various languages, is indeed beyond all
measure.

Now, when the Tibetan king Trisong Deutsen, himself an emanation of Mañjuśrī, was twenty years
of age, he formed a strong aspiration to spread the sacred teachings of the Dharma. So
he invited ‘Khenpo Bodhisattva’, otherwise known as Śāntarakṣita, from India, and the abbot
proceeded to teach dependent origination and the ten virtuous actions. A year later, the
foundation was laid for a huge temple, but the indigenous spirits created obstacles and prevented
its construction. In accordance with Śāntarakṣita’s prediction, the King sent five
messengers to India, to invite the great master Padmasambhava to come.

Guru Rinpoche had foreknowledge of this and was already on his way, gradually traveling from
Nepal, and he met them in Mangyul. He then visited the lands of Ngari, Ü-Tsang and Dokham
— indeed, there is not a single place within these regions where he did not miraculously
tread. At this time the Guru bound the twelve Tenma goddesses, the thirteen Gurlha and twenty-one
Genyen, as well as many other powerful spirits, taking hold of their life-force and
making them swear allegiance.

Padmsambhava met the king at the Tamarisk Forest at Drakmar, ‘Red Rock’, and then went to the
top of Mount Hepori where he brought all the ‘gods and demons’ of Tibet under his command.
He successfully laid the foundation for Samyé monastery, and saw it through to completion,
even employing the gods and demons who had previously proven troublesome. After five years
of work, ‘Glorious Samyé—Inconceivable—Unchanging––Spontaneously Accomplished Temple’
was finished, complete with the three temples of the Queens, all made to resemble Mount Meru,
surrounded by the four continents, eight subcontinents, sun and moon, with an outer wall
of iron mountains. And so it was consecrated, amidst miraculous and auspicious signs of
five kinds.

The King wished to translate the scriptures and establish the Dharma, so he arranged for many
intelligent young Tibetans to study to become translators, known as ‘lotsawas’. Inviting
other masters of the Tripiṭaka, the ‘Three Baskets’ of the Buddha’s teaching, from India,
the king asked the abbot Śāntarakṣita to ordain Tibet’s first seven monks, and thus gradually
established an ordained saṅgha. Śāntarakṣita and Padmasambhava, together with the other
Indian scholars, and with Vairocana, Kawa Paltsek, Chokro Lu’i Gyaltsen, Shang Yeshé Dé
and the other translators, then rendered into Tibetan all the extant Buddhist scriptures
of sūtra and tantra, as well as most of the treatises explaining them.

Vairocana and Namkhai Nyingpo, among others, were sent to India, where Vairocana studied Atiyoga
with Śrī Siṃha and Namkhai Nyingpo received the teachings on Śrī Heruka from the great
master Hūṃkāra. They both attained accomplishment and went on to spread these teachings
in Tibet.

King Trisong Deutsen then requested Padmasambhava to give empowerment and instruction in the
vajrayāna. So at Chimphu, the hermitage above Samyé, the great master opened the maṇḍala
of the Kagyé, into which he initiated nine chief disciples including the King. Each was entrusted
with a specific transmission, and all nine attained accomplishment (siddhi) through
practicing their respective teaching. Padmasambhava also gave countless profound and extraordinary
teachings connected with the three inner tantras to many destined students, chiefly
the king, his sons and the twenty-five disciples. This he did in Lhodrak Kharchu, Shotö
Tidro and many other places.

The Guru remained in Tibet for a total of fifty-five years and six months. He arrived when the
king was a young man of twenty-one and stayed until the king’s death at the age of sixty-nine.
He left a few years later, for the land of the rākṣasa demons. It is clear, then,
that the Guru stayed in Tibet for forty-eight years while the king was alive and seven years
and six months afterwards. Evil ministers fearful of the Guru’s power asked him to leave
Tibet. So after eight years at Samyé he appeared to depart by flying from the Mangyul pass
— but this was only an emanation.

Instead, the Guru secretly conferred with his patrons, and his actual embodiment, joined by
Yeshé Tsogyal and other destined beings, personally visited the twenty snow mountains of Ngari,
the twenty-one sādhana places in Ü and Tsang, the twenty-five great pilgrimage places
of Dokham, the three hidden lands of Upper, Lower and Middle Tibet, the five ravines, the
three realms and the one region. Each of these was blessed by the Guru as a sacred place
for practice — glacier, sand, rocks, hills and lakes — like the roots, branches and flowers
of a great tree. Indeed, there is not so much as a clod of earth the size of a horse-hoof
print that he did not cover.

Knowing that a descendant of the king would later try to destroy Buddhism in Tibet, Padmākara
gave many predictions for the future. Conferring with the king and the close disciples,
he concealed countless terma-teachings, both named and nameless — although the chief treasures
were 'the hundred vital treasures of the king',[16] the five great mind treasures, and
the twenty-five profound treasures. The reason these termas were hidden was to prevent the
teachings of secret mantra from disappearing, to prevent the vajrayāna from being corrupted
or modified by intellectuals, and thus to preserve the blessings, and benefit successive
generations of disciples. For each of these hidden treasures, Padmākara predicted the
time of disclosure, the person who would reveal the treasure, and the destined recipients
who would hold the teachings. In the thirteen places named Taktsang, ‘Tiger’s Lair’ — at Mönka
Nering Sengé Dzong and so forth — the Guru manifested in the terrifying wrathful form
of crazy wisdom, binding all the haughty spirits great and small, entrusting them under oath
to guard the terma-treasures. Then he was known as Dorjé Drolö, ‘Wild Wrathful Vajra’.

To inspire faith in future generations, the Guru and his consorts left their imprints at innumerable
places of practice. For instance, he left an imprint of his body at Dorjé Tsekpa
in Bumtang, hand prints at Namtso Chugmo, and footprints at Paro Drakar.

The prince Murub Tsepo was sent to attack the monastery of Bhata Hor. After the prince plundered
the buildings of their possessions, the gyalpo spirit Shing Cha Chen pursued him. Padmasambhava
manifested in the form of Guru Drakpo, ‘Wrathful Guru’, and bound the spirit under
oath, placing him in charge of guarding Samyé’s treasury.

After the death of King Trisong Deutsen, Padmākara placed Mutik Tsenpo on the throne. He performed
the drubchen of the Kadü Chökyi Gyatso at Tramdruk, where he entrusted the profound
teachings to Gyalsé Lhajé, the second prince, prophesying that he would benefit beings by
becoming a revealer of the hidden terma-treasures after thirteen future lives.

It is impossible to count exactly how many students in Tibet received empowerment from Padmasambhava
in person, but chief among them were the original twenty-five disciples, the middle
twenty-five disciples and the subsequent seventeen and twenty-one disciples. Eighty of
his students attained rainbow body at Yerpa, as well as the one hundred and eight meditators
at Chuwori, the thirty tantrikas at Yangdzong, and the fifty-five realized ones at Sheldrak.
There were the twenty-five ḍākinī students and the seven yoginīs as well. For example,
there were Amé Changchub Drekol, Gyü Changchub Shönnu, Rokben Namkha Yeshé, Nyang Deshin
Shekpa, Pang Jetsen Trom, Sha Migocha, Ngab Mi and Ngab Dré, Che Gyatso Drak, Dré Sherab
Drakpa. There were also those of the blood lines of Lang, Ngok, Khon, Rok, Go, Pang, So,
Zur, Nub, Gyu, Kyo — many of which continue to the present day. Thus, many masters of the
Sarma ‘New Schools’ also had forefathers connected with the lotus feet of the Great Master.

When the Guru was about to leave for the land of rākṣasas to the southwest, the Tibetan king,
ministers and all the disciples tried to dissuade him, but to no avail. To each, he gave
extensive heart advice and instruction, and then he left from Gungtang pass, riding upon
a horse or perhaps a lion, and all the while accompanied by numerous divine beings making
offerings. Reaching Ngayab Ling – the ‘Cāmara continent,’ the Guru went to the summit of Zangdok
Palri, ‘the Glorious Copper-Coloured Mountain’, where he liberated Raksha Tötreng,
king of the rākṣasas, and assumed his form. He then miraculously created the palace of Lotus
Light, endowed with inconceivable adornments, and emanated a replica of himself to reside
on each of the surrounding eight islands — the eight kings who teach the Kagyé, the 'Eight
Pronouncements’, amongst other teachings. He has thus saved the people of our continent,
Jambudvīpa, from mortal danger.

At present the Guru dwells on the ‘vidyādhara level of spontaneous presence’, the path of consummation,
as the Vajradhara regent, unshakable for as long as saṃsāra remains. With unbounded
compassion he cares for Tibet and constantly sends his emanations. Even after the teachings
of the vinaya have perished, his manifestations will appear one by one among tantric
practitioners. There will also be many destined disciples who will attain rainbow body.
And, in the future, when Buddha Maitreya appears in this world, it is said that Guru Padmasambhava
himself will emanate as the bodhisattva Drowa Kundül, ‘Tamer of All Beings’, and
will spread the teachings of secret mantra to all those of good fortune.

This short biography is just a partial narration, conforming to the perception of various ordinary
students.

| Lhasey Lotsawa Translations, 2018. (Translated by Peter Woods and Stefan Mang. Edited by Libby
Hogg.)