The Three Kāyas: Praises to the Great Master Padmasambhava
by Mipham Rinpoche

ku sum gyalwa yong kyi tukjé shuk
Compassionate power of the buddhas of the three kāyas
chikdü rigdzin gyalpö tsul changwa
Manifesting in a single form as the Vidyādhara King,
dechen khandrö wangchuk dorjé ku
In your vajra body, lord of the ḍākinīs of great bliss —
pema tötreng tsal la chaktsal tö
Mighty Lotus Skull-Garland,1 to you I offer homage and praise!

nangwa tayé gönpo chenrezik
Inseparable from Amitābha and the protector Avalokiteśvara,
yermé sindhu dang tsor trulpé ku
Manifesting on the waters of the radiant sindūra ocean,
jikten sum na chewé rik ngakchang
The great knowledge mantra holder of the triple world —
nyammé lama khyé la chaktsal tö
Peerless Guru, to you I offer homage and praise!

pema lé trung pema shyepé shyal
Born from a lotus flower, your lotus mouth smiling,
tsenpé zibar gyal kün shyal kyin chok
Resplendent with the marks and signs, regent of all victors,
jikten nga gyur tsungmé gyalwé sé
Unmatched heir of the conquerors, sovereign of the world —
demchok pema gyalpor chaktsal tö
Supreme Bliss Lotus King, to you I offer homage and praise!

neyul nam su tulshyuk chöpa kyang
Persisting in yogic discipline in sacred sites and lands,
ma tsok drekpa wangdü lé la kol
You magnetized arrogant female spirits and set them to work,
sateng küntu sang ngak tenpa pel
And spread the teachings of secret mantra throughout the world —
nyima özer shyab la chaktsal tö
Rays of the Sun, to you I offer homage and praise!

shejé né nam zikpa tsam gyi tok
At a mere glance you understood all that is to be known
nga rik künkhyen khepé pul du chin
An all-seeing scholar, the five sciences perfected,
jampé yang dang yermé gyalwé sé
Heir of the conquerors, inseparable from Mañjuśrī —
loden choksé khyé la chaktsal tö
Wise Seeker of the Sublime, to you I offer homage and praise!

denö sum dang gyüdé nam druk gi
You attained perfection in the realization and conduct
gong chö tarchin gyal dang gyalsé kyi
Of the tripiṭika and the six classes of tantra,
namtar gyatsö tsul la nga wang nyé
Master of the ocean of perfect liberation of the victors and their heirs —
padma sambhava la chaktsal tö
Lotus-Born Padmasambhava, to you I offer homage and praise!

gyalwa chok nyi lar yang jönpa shyin
As though it were the Supreme Victor himself returning,
namdak pungpo nga chang choktrul tsul
You came as a supreme emanation, your five aggregates pure,
chö chok sengé drayang sa sum drak
And sounded the melodious lion’s roar of supreme Dharma throughout the three realms —
shakya sengé khyö la chaktsal tö
Lion of the Śākyas, to you I offer homage and praise!

chimé dorjé tsé dang rigdzin sa
Reaching the vidyādhara stage of immortal vajra-life,
ngödrub kün gyi nga wang dampa nyé
You attained mastery of every siddhi and everything sublime,
kyilkhor kün gyi tso dang nyisumé
Thus becoming inseparable from the chief of all maṇḍalas —
pema jungné khyé la chaktsal tö
Lotus-Born Padmākara, to you I offer homage and praise!

dü dang mutek pé kyi golwa nam
Through your display of awe-inspiring miracles,
dzutrul chenpö ming gi lhakmar jé
You crushed your rivals — māras and heretics.
chetsen drenmé dorjé tutob dak
Lord of vajra magic, peerless in your splendour —
sengé dradrok khyé la chaktsal tö
Lion’s Roar, to you I offer homage and praise!

gangchen jong su gyalwé tenpa pel
The Victor’s teachings flourished in the Snowy Land;
nakpö tsalak dorjé tu yi tul
All corrupted parties were subdued by vajra magic;
sateng tamché zabmö ter gyi kang
Everywhere the land was filled with priceless terma-treasures –
dorjé drolö tsal la chaktsal tö
Mighty Vajra Wrath, to you I offer homage and praise!

ku chik tsen gyé trul tsen nyishu dang
Your one kāya, eight forms, and twenty emanations
mi jé jikten so druk lasokpar
Pervade the sahā-world and the thirty-six realms,
tayé trulpé shyingkham küntu khyab
And all the infinite range of manifested fields.
gyutrul gyalpo khyé la chaktsal tö
King of Magical Display, to you I offer homage and praise!

gyalsé sempa gyé dang drubdé gyé
Inseparable from the eight bodhisattvas, the eight iṣṭadevatās,
lasok gyalwa gyalsé gyatso dang
And the ocean of victors and their heirs,
yermé lama kyilkhor kün gyi dak
You are the unsurpassed chief of all maṇḍalas —
tsungmé drenpa khyö la chaktsal tö
Peerless Guide, to you I offer homage and praise!

sangye kün gyi tukjé chikdü né
Sole embodiment of the compassion of all the buddhas,
nyikmé drowa kyabpar dzepé chir
In your role as protector of this degenerate age
jinlab tukjé lhakpar nyurwa yi
With your exalted compassion for beings, and your blessing,
lechen jesu dzin la chaktsal tö
You care for your disciples: to you I offer homage and praise!

palden dzokpé sangye pema kyé
Lotus-born, glorious, perfect buddha,
nampa künkhyen yeshe dzö dzinpa
Knower of all things, you hold the treasury of wisdom.
rigdzin gyalpo gyutrul natsok tön
Vidyādhara King, magical display of myriad teachers,
kün lé chewa sangye rik ngakchang
Grander than the rest, awakened wisdom mantra holder,

rangjung kuntuzangpo khyö nyi la
Naturally present Samantabhadra —
miché depé lekpar töpa yi
May the illuminating merit, shining bright as daylight,
sönam nyinmor jepé özer gyi
Of these elegant praises, sung with unstinting faith,
tsokyé tenpé petsal gyé gyur chik
Cause the lotus grove of the Lake-born’s teachings to flourish!

nöchü güpa tadak rabtu shyi
May the decline of worlds and beings be pacified completely!
pal dang drakpa tashi delek pel
May glory, renown, auspiciousness, happiness, and excellence flourish!
dro kün tsungmé gurü jezung né
May every being be accepted by you, peerless Guru,
rangjung pemé gopang chok tob shok
And attain the supreme state of the innate Lotus-born!

These sixteen verses, equal in number to the sixteen delights, were written down in the year
of the Male Fire Horse, on the 27th lunar day of the eight month,2 by Mipham Jampal Gyepa.
May virtue and excellence flourish!

| Lhasey Lotsawa Translations, 2018. (Translated by Stefan Mang and Kaleb Yaniger. Edited by
Libby Hogg.)
↑ Here and in the following verses the author invokes the various manifestations of Guru Rinpoche.
For poetic consideration we chose to translate Guru Rinpoche’s names into English.
So that the reader may easily identify them by their Tibetan names, we have italicized Guru
Rinpoche’s names whenever they appear in the Tibetan phonetics.↑ Monday 15th October, 1906.